Wily + Python > Emacs + Lisp?

based on a paper by
    Gary Capell <gary@cs.su.oz.au>
    Basser Department of Computer Science,
    University of Sydney, 2006
    Australia


Wily is an editing environment which can be extended with Python programs.
Instead of using an embedded Python interpreter, Wily talks a simple
message protocol, and a module lets Python speak the same protocol. This
approach is general (one can use any language) and clean (the editor is
responsible for only a small set of functions). The message interface
promotes a clear separation of functions, with the Wily editing environment
providing a standard way of interacting with client programs. The main
disadvantage may be that the looser binding between programming language
and editor is less efficient, but this is not expected to be a significant
problem.

The editor itself is simple, clean, and efficient, with a few features
which combine consistently. It abandons backwards compatibility with the
virtual terminals of yesteryear, to take full advantage of a bitmapped
terminal and three button mouse.


This documet describes:

  * (very briefly) the Wily editing environment
  * Wily's message protocol
  * the Python module which translates a Wily message stream
  * some sample tools written using this combination.
  * some alternative approaches to connecting an editor and a programming
    language
  * further work to be done on Wily.
  * How to download Wily.
  * Acknowledgements.

An appendix defines the Python interface in more detail.

Overview of Wily

This is necessarily very brief, and Wily and Acme are very different from what
most people are used to. Please read Rob Pike's paper for a better and more
complete description of the interface.

Wily's main attractions are that it is very simple (the User Manual describing
the whole user interface is about seven pages), very quick to use, and
integrates well with other Unix tools.

History

Wily emulates in the Unix and X Windows environment the Acme editor from Plan 9
. Acme couldn't easily be ported to Unix because it is written in Alef (a
concurrent programming language not widely available) and uses non-portable
features of Plan 9 . Also, a port of Acme would not be freely distributable.

The name ``Wily'' derives from Wile E. Coyote, an avid consumer of Acme
products.

Modern Aesthetics

Wily windows, Unicode text propotionally spaced

The screen is divided into columns, which are divided into windows. A window
may represent a file, a directory, or the output from some program. The screen,
columns and windows each have a narrow horizontal ``tag'' at the top, which
contains some useful text, and for windows contains the name of the window and
a "file is modified" indicator.

Text is displayed in a propotionally spaced font by default. There is a built
in function to toggle with a monospace font, but there are very few occasions
when this is necessary or desirable. In most cases limiting a text editor to
monospace fonts is blindly following the hardware limitations of the 1960s.

Text is read and written as UTF8-encoded Unicode, providing some support for
editing multi-lingual and scientific text, but remaining backwardly compatible
with plain 7-bit ASCII text.

Everything is text

All actions in Wily are through creating and interacting with text on the
screen, using the three-button mouse and the keyboard. B1 (mouse button one)
selects text, B2 executes text and B3 attempts to ``goto'' the text.

When executing text, there are some built in operations, such as ``Quit'', or
``Del'' which are executed by Wily itself. Otherwise, the command is executed
in a subprocess, with output redirected to a window within Wily and input from
/dev/null. It is also possible to use the current selection (currently selected
text) as input for and/or output of some child program. For example |fmt
formats the current selection, >spell checks its spelling and <date replaces it
with the current time.

The goto operation used with B3 is polymorphic in that it recognises three
different patterns:

    name
        If name is a file or directory, open it, otherwise search for the literal
        name
    :address
        Search for address in the current window. The address may be a line
        number, a character number, a regular expression, or two of these,
        separated by a comma.
    file:address
        Open file and search in it for address

        Wily's power derives in part from its general treatment of text.
        Whether text is found in a file, or directory listing, created by Wily,
        output by some other program, or typed by the user, it can all be
        treated the same way. A simple text file may be used as a menu of
        commands or a simple form of hypertext. Previously typed commands or
        ``usage'' messages can be edited and executed. There is no need for
        dialogs, menus, modes, buttons or accelerator keys, just operations on
        text on the screen.

No wasted user actions

    Wily minimizes the number of unnecessary mouse or keyboard actions the
    user must make. For instance, placing newly created windows is done
    without needing the user's help, although the user can easily rearrange
    things if Wily's heuristics aren't acceptable. Wily also makes cutting,
    pasting, executing and searching for text so easy to do with the mouse
    that there is no need to retype text already on the screen.

    Cutting and pasting text is made particularly convenient using
    combinations of mouse buttons. To cut text, select it with B1, and
    while still holding B1, also click B2: this is a B1-B2 chord. To paste
    text use a B1-B3 chord. This style is unusual, but once it becomes
    familiar other methods of cutting and pasting seem unbearably slow.
    Another chord (B2-B1) is used to execute some text with an argument.

    To avoid having to position the mouse accurately, a mouse selection of
    zero length (i.e. a mouse click) is expanded in a ``reasonable''
    manner. Clicking with B2 in a word expands to that word, which is then
    executed. Clicking with B3 in an address (e.g. foo.c:45) expands to
    that address. Double-clicking with B1 just inside paired braces,
    brackets or quotes selects the region thus delimited.

    Wily's general approach to text as commands and addresses is compounded
    because these basic functions can be accessed so conveniently. Most
    operations can be achieved with a single mouse click or mouse
    combination.

Synergy

    The consistent and general use of text for input and output in Wily
    makes the combination of its features more than the sum of its parts.

    Stepping through an example session might best illustrate this:

        Susan has fetched the file frob.tar.Z. She clicks with B1 in the
        file name, and with B2 in the word untarz. The utility untarz
        uncompresses and untars the file, verbosely printing file names as
        it goes. She clicks with B3 on one of the file names, INSTALL,
        which opens the file. The INSTALL file suggests that she run
        configure then make. She clicks B2 in each of these words to run
        the suggested programs, but there's a problem. The make fails when
        gcc quits with the error message
        keyboard.c:4: strings.h: No such file or directory.
        She clicks with B3 in the first part of the error message, which
        opens the file and selects the line. On Susan's system there is a
        string.h but no strings.h. She removes the last s with a B1-B2
        chord. When she modifies the file, Wily sets the ``file modified''
        indicator, and adds the word ``Save'' to the tag for this window.
        Susan clicks B2 on the word Save to write the file, clicks B2 on
        make again, and she's done.

    This whole process uses about ten mouse clicks and no typing.

Connecting Programs to Wily

    Wily waits for a program to connect to it using a socket, and then
    sends and receives messages. The messages can be RPC requests and
    replies, or ``event'' messages generated by Wily when certain actions
    happen in windows which a remote program has asked to monitor.

    The interface is deliberately at a rather high level. The intent is
    that Wily will take care of of the details of interaction, with other
    programs providing the semantics of executing a command, opening a
    window or searching for an address. This promotes a consistent set of
    tools and an efficient division of labour, but necessarily at the loss
    of some generality.

    The requests allow the remote program to
      - list the windows currently open
      - create a new window with a given name, which may or may not
        correspond to an existing file or directory
      - ask to be sent some subset of the events which happen in a
        particular window
      - change the name of a window
      - read the text from some part of a window
      - modify the text in a window
      - act as if some string were selected with B2 or B3 in a window
        (useful for searching for text, or accessing built in functions)

    A program may ask to be notified when events happen in a particular
    window. These events are generated when:
      - text is selected with B2 or B3 (i.e. the user is trying to execute
        or ``goto'' some text)
      - text has been modified
      - the window is destroyed

    When a program is being sent B2 or B3 events, Wily doesn't act on them,
    merely sends them on. The program may opt to ``send back'' some events
    which Wily will then act on. Events which modify text, on the other
    hand, are always handled by Wily, which then may inform the remote
    program what has happened. In other words, the remote program cannot
    stop the user modifying any piece of text, although it can repair the
    text later if it wishes.

The Python interface

    wily_module.c

        This is a very simple interface between Python and the Wily message
        protocol. It establishes a connection, provides remote procedure calls
        and queues events until they are requested.

        A Connection is initialized with no arguments, and represents the
        connection to Wily. All the other functions are methods of a connection
        object.

        The Connection has methods to return a list of windows representing all
        the windows currently open in Wily, to create a new window, and to
        return the next event from Wily. Windows are represented as integers,
        which correspond to window identifiers with Wily, and events are
        represented as tuples.

        The Connection has a number of methods which provide operations on Wily
        windows. These operations allow a program, once it has an identifier
        for a window, to change its event mask, its name or its ``tools''
        (useful text in the window's tag), read or modify some of its text, or
        simulate a B2 or B3 action.

    wilywin.py

        This is a small Python module which provides a friendlier interface to
        Wily's functionality.

    Example Program Fragment

        # Create a window called "hello",and fill it with
        # the text "Hello, world"

        import wily
        con = wily.Connection()
        win = con.win("hello")
        con.replace(win, 0,0, "Hello, world\n")

    Sample Tools

        These are small tools written as proof of concept, to test and refine
        the message interface, and as templates for other applications.

    Session save and restore

        There are two programs to save and restore the ``state'' of an editing
        session. The ``save'' program determines from Wily what windows are
        open, what the current selection is for each, and the full text of
        windows which don't represent a file or directory. The ``restore''
        program connects to Wily and uses the saved information to create and
        massage windows to hopefully return the session to the original state.

    Terminal

        There are some useful programs which require the traditional ``prompt
        and read a line of input'' interface. Examples include gdb, /bin/sh or
        /bin/mail. To use these programs, but from within the Wily editing
        environment, a simple terminal program was written, in C. It is called
        win.

        Win provides standard input and output for its client program, and
        creates and monitors a Wily window, maintaining an input point. When
        win sees a carriage return entered after the input point, it sends the
        text between the input point and the carriage return to the client
        program. Output coming back from the client program is inserted just
        before the input point.

        Win does not attempt to provide a pseudo tty or work with any programs
        which attempt to use curses-style screen addressing. However, it works
        fine for programs such as those mentioned above, and was written with
        only 230 lines of commented C.

    Alternative approaches

        Wily's approach to extending the editor is to communicate with other
        processes using a socket or pipe. Here we examine some alternative
        strategies, and why Wily doesn't use them.

        Build an interpreter into the editor

        This is by far the most common design for an extensible editor.

        There are a few advantages to this approach. Letting the extension
        language share the address space of the editor is more efficient than
        using IPC. The language can also be tailored to provide a close match
        to the editing requirements.

        There are two reasons why this approach was rejected for Wily. The
        first reason is that it restricts users to a single language, and it
        often means designing a new (possibly half-baked) language. The second
        reason is that embedding a language interpreter in the editing
        environment seemed an unnecessary step towards monolithism and code
        bloat.

        For comparison, below are the sizes of three stripped, dynamically
        linked executables on the author's sun4d Solaris system:

          167264 wily
          234272 vi
         1873336 xemacs

        Link code dynamically

        Another approach is to dynamically link extension code with the editor.
        This is more general and more efficient than the built in interpreter
        design. CodeWright® from Premia uses this approach in the Microsoft
        Windows environment.

        One problem with this approach is that dynamic linking is not standard
        on all UNIXes. Another is that one errant code fragment dynamically
        linked in might damage the integrity of the editor. The result might be
        lost data, or even worse, data quietly modified in some subtle manner.

        When this approach becomes ubiquitously available and more secure, it
        will be re-examined.

    ILU or CORBA

        It would seem that ILU and CORBA both provide a ready-made solution to
        turn an editor into a distributed object server. However, both seemed
        too heavy-weight for this simple task.

    Further Work

        There is a strong belief amongst Wily's users and developers that
        ``creeping featurism'' is evil. Most of the ongoing work will be
        towards refining existing features, and improving the clarity and
        correctness of the code. Retaining the ``look and feel'' of Acme is
        also an important consideration.

        There is still room for innovation, though. The message interface is
        still very young, and may change with the demands of application
        writers. The author hopes that the Python community will be able to
        make good use of an editor programmable in Python. Although there is no
        need for cursor keys to navigate around Wily, they may be added later,
        although they are a low priority.

    Networking and security

        Currently programs connect to Wily by writing to a UNIX named pipe.
        Wily's security relies on this pipe being writable only by its owner.
        This means Wily can't accept connections directly from remote machines,
        which would be desirable for some applications. A design which avoids
        this limitation securely and efficiently has not been decided upon.

    Obtaining Wily

    Wily is freely available.

    The prime source for information about Wily is the WWW page at http://
    www.cs.su.oz.au/~gary/wily/ The wily distribution contains
    wilymodule.c, and can be obtained at ftp://ftp.cs.su.oz.au/gary/
    wily.tgz

    Acknowledgements

        The early design and source of Wily owe a lot to Bill Trost. Wily and
        this paper have also been improved by patches, suggestions and bug
        reports from Assar, Davor Cubranic, Kyle Dean, Stephen Gallimore, Mark
        H. Wilkinson, Bjorn Helgaas, Steve Kilbane, Beirne Konarski, Bob
        Krzaczek, Alberto Nava, Arnold Robbins, Rich Salz, Scott Schwartz,
        Chris Siebenmann, and Richard Wolff.

        Wily builds on the Sam distribution by Rob Pike and Howard Trickey, and
        originally used libtext by James Farrow. James Farrow also makes
        available a set of Unicode fonts for X at ftp.cs.su.oz.au/matty/unicode
    /
    -----------------------------------------------------------------------

Appendix: The Python/Wily Module

    Connection

    con = wily.Con()

    Connection objects have no attributes and suport the following methods:

    list()
        Returns a list of names and Win objects representing the windows
        currently open.
    win(name)
        Return a new window called name
    event()
        Return the next Event. Note that this method will block until
        an event is available.
    eventwouldblock()
        Indicates whether calling Connection.event() would block.
        returnevent(event)
        Send event back to Wily, probably because we have no use for
        it.

    The following methods of a connection object act on a window:

    attach(id,mask)
        Request events for this window.
    detach(id)
        Cancel request for events for this window.
    setname(id,string)
        Set the name of this window.
    settools(id,string)
        Set the toolbar for this window.
    read(id,from,to)
        Read some range from this window, returns a UTF8 string.
    replace(id,from,to, string)
        Replace some range of window with some other text.
    run(id, command)
        Makes wily act as if command had been selected with B2 in this
        window. This can be used to access Wily's built in functions.
        For example, to delete w, call con.run(w_id, "Del")
    goto(id,address)
        Makes wily act as if address had been selected with B3 in this
        window. Returns a tuple identifying the window and position
        which are the result of the search.

    Events

        Events are returned as tuples. Every event has at least two
        elements, which are a window identifer, and an event type
        identifier (which is one of wily.GOTO, wily.EXEC, wily.REPLACE
        or wily.DEL). All of these event types except DEL also have a
        from, to and string attribute.
