Wily User Manual

Command-line Arguments

wily [-p9fn font] [-fn font] [-p9fixed fixedfont] [-a tabsize] [-c columns]
[file name...]

-p9fn font
    (or X resource p9font) set the default proportional font. This must be the
    name of a Plan 9 font file.
    -fn font
        (or X resource font) set the default proportional font. This must be
        the name of a X font. The default is "variable"
        -p9fixed fixedfont
            (or X resource p9fixed) set the monospace font. This must be the
            name of a Plan 9 font file. The default monospace font is "fixed"
            -a tabsize
                set the maximum width of tabs (as multiple of the width of the
                character '0') for the proportional font. Defaults to 4.
                -c columns
                    set the initial number of columns. Defaults to 2.
                    -e command
                    Run 'command' on startup.
                    file name...
                    Start wily with the named files and directories open.

                    Environment variables

                    SHELL
                    External commands are sent to the shell for evaluation.
                    Defaults to /bin/sh
                    HISTORY
                    If $HISTORY or $history are set, commands are written to
                    this file before execution.
                    WILYBAK
                    Wily uses $WILYBAK or $HOME/.wilybak as the directory for
                    backups.
                    WMAINTAG, WCOLTAG, WFILETAG, WDIRTAG
                    If any of these are set, their value is appended to the
                    default text to be added to the tag of the main window, a
                    column, a file window or a directory window, respectively.
                    WILYTOOLS
                    If $WILYTOOLS or $HOME/.wilytools exist, they are read and
                    used as a tools patterns file. (See later section).
                    INCLUDES
                    If set, this is used as a search path for include files.
                    WILYLABEL, w
                    For external processes, Wily sets $WILYLABEL and $w to the
                    label of the window in whose context a command is
                    executing.
                    PATH
                    Wily itself ignores $PATH, but when it calls the shell to
                    run external programs the value of $PATH is important.
                    WILYFIFO, DISPLAY, TMPDIR
                    Wily communicates with some other programs using a fifo at
                    a well-known location.

                    The name of the fifo will be $WILYFIFO if this variable is
                    set, otherwise it will be /tmp/wilyUSER$DISPLAY, where USER
                    is calculated from the password file. If $TMPDIR is
                    defined, it is used instead of /tmp.

                    Wily also sets $WILYFIFO so any children it creates will
                    know how to talk to it.

                    Appearance

                    Column, window, tag, body, resize box

                    screen shot Wily appears as one or more vertical columns,
                    divided into windows of scrolling text. Each column or
                    window is headed by a one-line tag. The leftmost text of
                    the tag (up until the first whitespace) is the name of the
                    window. Usually this is the name of some file or directory.
                    Wily also places other bits of text in the tag, which might
                    be useful later as commands. There is a one-line tag above
                    all the columns, which is called the wily tag.

                    The text in the body of the window may represent a
                    directory, a file, the interface to some program like a
                    news reader, or the output from a program.

                    The small square-ish box to the left of the tag is called
                    the resize box. The resize box is used for moving and
                    reshaping windows and columns.

                    If the resize box is filled in, this indicates that the
                    window is dirty. A dirty window contains text which has
                    been modified since it was last read from or written to
                    disk.

                    Proportionally spaced, Unicode text

                    Text is displayed in a propotionally spaced font by
                    default. There is a built in function to toggle with a
                    monospace font when required.

                    Text is read and written as UTF8-encoded Unicode, providing
                    some support for editing multi-lingual and scientific text,
                    but remaining backwardly compatible with plain 7-bit ASCII
                    text. See 9term for an example of another program with
                    Unicode support, with some screen shots.

                    Notation

                    B1, B2 & B3 are left, middle, right mouse buttons,
                    respectively. Used as a verb, they mean "click with that
                    button". E.g. "B2 in the command word" means "click with
                    the middle mouse button in the command word".

                    B1B2 means to select some text with B1 held down, then
                    click and release on B2 while still holding B1 down.

                    Sweep with B1 means to hold down B1, drag it across some
                    text to select it, and then release B1.

                    The last selected text is the text which was most recently
                    selected, usually by being swept with B1.

                    The last selected window is the window containing the last
                    selected text. This is indicated by that window having a
                    slightly thicker border. If the last selected text was in a
                    column tag or the wily tag, there is no last selected
                    window.

                    Context

                    All text in wily has a context. The context is the name of
                    a directory associated with that text. This context is used
                    when executing commands and opening files.

                    If the text is in a window, its context is the name of that
                    window, up to and including the last /. So if three windows
                    have the names /usr/gary/+Errors, /usr/gary/guide and /usr/
                    gary/, the context for all the text in all of these windows
                    is the same: /usr/gary/. Note that the context need not be
                    a directory which actually exists.

                    If the text is in a tag which isn't part of a window (i.e.
                    a column tag or the wily tag), the context is the name of
                    the directory where wily was started.

                    Scrollbars and scrolling

                    Scrollbars are proportional, i.e. the size and position of
                    the scrollbar's thumb indicates the size and position of
                    the visible portion of the text.

                    Each of the three mouse buttons does something different
                    when clicked in the scrollbar.

                    B1 and B3 are used for relative movements. B3 moves the
                    text next to the mouse pointer up to the top of the window.
                    B1 moves the text at the top of the window down so it is
                    next to the pointer. Both of these rules have the effect
                    that clicking near the top of the scrollbar causes small
                    movements, (either up or down) and clicking near the bottom
                    causes large movements.

                    B2 is used for absolute positioning. B2 moves the visible
                    part of the text to a point in the text proportional to how
                    far down the scrollbar the pointer is. That is, clicking at
                    the bottom of the scrollbar with B2 jumps to the end of the
                    text, clicking at the top of the scrollbar with B2 jumps to
                    the beginning of the text.

                    All of these movements repeat if the mouse button is held
                    down in the scroll bar.

                    The PageUp and PageDown keys scroll up or down by about
                    half a page. The Home and End keys scroll to the top or
                    bottom of the file.

                    Selecting and editing text (B1)

                    Type normally anywhere on the screen to enter text. The
                    keyboard focus follows the pointer in a "point to type"
                    fashion. That is, the characters you type will appear in
                    the tag or body which currently contains the pointer.
                    Position the cursor within text either with cursor keys, or
                    clicking once with B1. Select text by sweeping it with B1.
                    Sweeping text and then typing replaces the selected text
                    with the typed text.

                    Control Keys

                    ctrl-u
                    delete line
                    ctrl-w
                    delete word
                    Escape
                    if the selection is null, select all the most recently
                    typed text, otherwise delete the selection

                    Double-click

                    Double-clicking with B1 can select a word, a line, or the
                    text delimited by quotation marks, braces, brackets or
                    parentheses, depending on where you double-click.

                    Executing commands (B2)

                    Selecting the command

                    Sweep text with B2 to execute it as a command.

                    If you start sweeping some text with B2, then decide you
                    don't want to execute it, click B3 before you release B2
                    (i.e. a B3B2 chord) to abort.

                    The command window is the window containing the text which
                    was swept with B2. The context of the command is the
                    context of the text swept with B2.

                    If the text starts with the name of one of the builtin
                    commands, that builtin is executed.

                    Otherwise, the command is executed by forking a subprocess,
                    establishing an environment and execing $SHELL -c command.

                    Environment for external commands

                        The current directory is set to the context of the
                    command.
                        $WILYLABEL and $w are set to the name of the command
                    window and added to the environment.
                        Standard input is set to /dev/null
                        Standard output and standard error are set such that
                    output to them ends up being sent to a window in Wily
                    called context/+Errors
                        The first word of the command will be added to the wily
                    tag to indicate which programs are currently running.
                        $WILYFIFO will be set to the name of the fifo this
                    instance of Wily is listening to for messages. See the main
                    wily page for programmers manuals on how to use this
                    messaging interface.

                    One exception is that if the name of the command starts
                    with "|", "<" or ">", standard input and output of the
                    command are set up such that the last selection is piped
                    through the command, fed into the command or replaced by
                    the output of the command, respectively.

                    For example if a paragraph is currently the last selection,
                    executing "|fmt" will format the paragraph, executing ">lp"
                    will print it, and executing "<cat file" will replace it
                    with "file"

                    Builtin Functions

                    By convention all of the builtin functions start with a
                    capital letter. Some of them operate differently if called
                    with an argument.
                    Put, Get, Putall
                    Put and Get write the window to disk, or fetch from disk,
                    respectively. If called with an argument, they will use the
                    argument as the filename, instead of the name of the
                    window.

                    Putall writes all dirty files to disk.
                    New, Del
                    Create a new window, or delete a window, respectively. If
                    New is called with an argument, it will use the argument as
                    the name of a file to create, otherwise the new window is
                    called context/New, where the context is taken from the
                    last selection.
                    Look
                    Searches in the command window for literal text. The text
                    it searches for is either the argument to Look, or the
                    current selection in the body of the command window.
                    Undo, Redo
                    Move backward or forwards through the (infinite) Undo log.
                    If called with an argument, these commands repeat until
                    they reach an end of the log, or the text is in the same
                    state as it was the last time the file was read from or
                    written to disk.
                    Newcol, Delcol
                    Create or delete a column
                    Cut, Paste, Snarf
                    Cut the currently selected text to the X selection buffer,
                    replace the currently selected text with the X selection
                    buffer, or copy the currently selected text to the X
                    selection buffer, respectively.
                    Quit
                    Exit wily.
                    Kill
                    Kill some process which was started from wily. If called
                    with an argument, Kill that process. Without an argument,
                    Kill writes a list of possible Kill commands to window
                    $wilydir/+Errors
                    Font
                    Toggle between fixed and proportional fonts. Depending on
                    where Font is clicked, changes the font for a window, a
                    column, or for all the windows on the screen.
                    Dotfiles
                    Toggles whether or not dot files are displayed in
                    directories. Directories will not be re-read automatically,
                    though.
                    Anchor
                    Adds an address to the tag of the last selected window. If
                    called with an argument, the address is a line address,
                    otherwise the address is a character address. The address
                    is of the form ":currentaddress,."

                    To select large chunks of text, B1 click at the beginning
                    position, execute Anchor, B1 click at the end position,
                    then click with B3 in the address in the tag. The anchor
                    may also be used as a bookmark, or just to find the
                    character or line position in a window.
                    Split
                    Split the most recently selected window into two. Editing
                    actions in one window will be visible in the other.
                    Indent
                    Toggles autoindent for a window or all windows, depending
                    on the command window.
                    Clear
                    Deletes all the text in the command window.

                    The system tries to ensure that the names of some builtin
                    commands are added to or removed from window tags as
                    appropriate. For instance, when a window becomes "dirty",
                    the word "Put" is added to its tag, and removed again when
                    the file becomes clean. Similarly, the words "Undo" and
                    "Redo" should appear in the tag of a window when and only
                    when they can be executed.

                    Open/Search (B3)

                    Sweep text with B3 to make Wily try to goto (open or search
                    for) the swept text.

                    The text may be interpreted as:
                    filename:address
                    Open filename and search in it for address
                    :address
                    Search for address in the window containing the swept text,
                    or in the last selected window, if the swept text was not
                    in a window.
                    filename
                    Open file or directory filename if it exists.
                    includefilename
                    Open includefilename if it can be "massaged" (see below)
                    into the name of an include file (e.g. stdio.h)
                    literal
                    If the swept text is contained in a window, do a literal
                    search in the body of the window for literal.

                    When trying to open a file or directory, the swept file
                    name will be interpreted relative to its context. For
                    example, the text foo.c:14 in a window with context /usr/
                    gary/src/ will be interpreted to mean the address /usr/gary
                    /src/foo.c:14

                    Addresses

                    Wily uses the address and regular expression code from Sam.
                    Please refer to the Sam manual for a better explanation.
                    #n
                    The empty string after character n; #0 is the beginning of
                    the file.
                    n
                    Line n; 1 is the beginning of the file.
                    /regexp/ ?regexp?
                    The substring that matches the regular expression, found by
                    looking toward the end (/) or beginning (?) of the file,
                    and if necessary continuing the search from the other end
                    to the starting point of the search. The matched substring
                    may straddle the starting point. When entering a pattern
                    containing a literal question mark for a backward search,
                    the question mark should be specified as a member of a
                    class.

                    Regexps are as defined in regexp(6) in the Plan 9 manual.
                    $
                    The null string at the end of the file.
                    .
                    Dot. The current selection in a window.
                    address1,address2
                    The range from the start of address1 (defaulting to the
                    start of the file) to the end of address2 (defaulting to
                    the end of the file). E.g. :., selects from the current
                    selection to the end of file.

                    Include Files

                    When searching for a filename, if the filename doesn't
                    exist in the context of the search text, Wily also tries to
                    expand the file name using a few simple heuristics.

                    If we are searching for name and name appears between
                    double-quotes or angle brackets, Wily also searches for
                    name in the directories in the search path $INCLUDES (or /
                    usr/include, if $INCLUDES isn't set).

                    For example, sweeping stdio.h between angle brackets will
                    open /usr/include/stdio.h on the author's system.

                    Mouse short cuts

                    Cut (B1B2), Paste (B1B3)

                    To cut some text into the clipboard, select the text with
                    B1, and while holding it down, click B2. The selected text
                    will be cut from the window and copied to the clipboard.

                    Similarly, select some text with B1, and while holding it
                    down also click B2, and the selected text will be replaced
                    by the contents of the clipboard. The clipboard will be
                    unaltered.

                    Note that so long as you hold down B1, you can alternately
                    Cut and Paste the selected text with B2 and B3. A Cut
                    immediately followed by a Paste in this way leaves the file
                    unmodified, and has the effect of copying the current
                    selection to the clipboard.

                    Execute with argument (B2B1)

                    A command can be called with an argument using another
                    mouse chord. Sweep the command with B2, and while holding
                    it down, click B1. The last selection will be appended to
                    the command. The context of the command and the command
                    window will be set to the context of the last selection
                    (unless the command is a builtin).

                    For example, say I have a script called "sg" (short for
                    source grep) that greps through all the source files in the
                    current directory for a symbol given as an argument. I can
                    then sweep with B1 to select "printf" in a source file,
                    then B2B1 on the word sg (anywhere). The command "sg
                    printf" will then run in the same directory as the source
                    file.

                    Selection expansion

                    A null selection (single click) with B2 or B3 will be
                    expanded to some of the surrounding text.

                    A click inside an existing selection will be expanded to
                    that selection.

                    This means you can select (with B1) some complicated
                    command once, and B2 inside this selection many times to
                    execute the command repeatedly.

                    This rule is also helpful when searching through multiple
                    occurrences of a piece of text, as clicking with B3 in the
                    most recently found instance searches for the next
                    instance.

                    A click that is not inside an existing selection will be
                    expanded depending on which mouse button was used.

                    A single B2 click automatically selects a sensible "word"
                    as the command. Commands can be built-in (Capital first
                    letters, by convention) or passed to the shell for
                    invocation.

                    Clicks with B2 are expanded to select commands, i.e.
                    strings of alphanumeric characters, |, > or <. Clicks with
                    B3 are expanded to select addresses, i.e. strings of
                    alphanumeric characters, :, ",".

                    Miscellaneous

                    Window management

                    Wily windows are placed automatically using heuristics.
                    Hopefully most of the time the window will be placed
                    somewhere useful. However, windows and columns can be moved
                    and reshaped. The resize box (the little box on the far
                    left of the tag) of a pane or a column may be manipulated
                    to move or reshape a window.

                    Dragging the resize box (with any mouse button) moves the
                    column or window to the desired location.

                    Clicking in a pane's button with different mouse buttons
                    has these different effects:
                    B1
                    the window grows a bit, first taking up any blank space in
                    the column
                    B2
                    Every window except the desired one is shrunk so that only
                    their tags are visible, leaving more space for the desired
                    window.
                    B3
                    The window expands to take up the whole column, obscuring
                    all the other windows in that column. Clicking with any
                    mouse button in the window's resize box will undo this
                    effect.

                    Cursor Warping

                    After a successful search, the text that was found is
                    highlighted, and the cursor is warped there, so that to
                    search for the next instance of the search text, no cursor
                    movement is required, it is only necessary to click the
                    rightmost mouse button again. Window re-arranging
                    operations warp the cursor to the resize box of the window
                    that moved, so the move can be easily refined.

                    Back-up files

                    Whenever a dirty window is to be deleted, a backup is made.
                    This is an alternative to the familiar (and often-annoying)
                    "are you sure you want to close this window?" dialog. A
                    warning message is printed when this happens.

                    Backup files are kept in directory $WILYBAK if it exists,
                    or $HOME/.wilybak. In this directory the file TOC is a
                    table of contents showing what real file each backup file
                    maps to.

                    .wilytools

                    Wily attempts to read either $WILYTOOLS or $HOME
                    /.wilytools. Each line in this file should be either empty,
                    a comment (starts with '#') or a pattern, a tab, and some
                    arbitrary text. The pattern is a regular expression. Every
                    time Wily creates a new window, if the window's name
                    matches one of the patterns, the text after the tab on that
                    line will be appended to the tag for that window. Wily
                    stops searching after the first match.

                    Below is the author's .wilytools :

                    Mace.*Errors$   Clear mace subject
                    Errors$         Clear
                    Mace/in/$       mace subject
                    Mace/in         reply wrm wmov
                    Mace.*/$        subject
                    Mace/out        deliver
                    Mace            reply   wrm
                    /src/.*/$       def sg
                    News            followup
                    Makefile        make
                    print/$         gv bpr
                    \.py$           ptest
                    bin/rc/         775

                    The mace, reply, deliver and subject scripts and Mace
                    directory are to do with reading mail. def and sg are
                    useful scripts for searching through source files, so they
                    are added to the tag of any directory with src in its
                    pathname. make is a logical command to execute when viewing
                    a Makefile.

                    Fonts

                    Wily uses two fonts: a variable-width default font, and an
                    alternative fixed-width font. These may be set with
                    command-line arguments or X resources.

                    Wily first tries to open a Plan 9 font file, given as
                    either a -p9fn command-line option or *p9font X resource.
                    Failing that, it uses the -fn command-line option or *font
                    X resource. Failing that, it uses the font "variable".

                    Plan 9 font files are useful for supporting the full
                    Unicode range without requiring massive fonts. The font
                    file sets up a font by joining together different subfonts.
                    See the 9term page for information about obtaining Unicode
                    fonts and utilities to convert other character sets to
                    Unicode.

                    The format of of a font file is described below: (Taken
                    from font(4) from the Plan 9 Manual)

                    External fonts are described by a plain text file that can
                    be read using rdfontfile. The format of the file is a
                    header followed by any number of subfont range
                    specifications. The header contains two numbers: the height
                    and the ascent. The height is the inter-line spacing and
                    the ascent is the distance from the top of the line to the
                    baseline. These numbers are chosen to display consistently
                    all the subfonts of the font. A subfont range specification
                    contains two numbers and a font name. The numbers are the
                    inclusive range of characters covered by the subfont, and
                    name specifies the name of an X font suitable for
                    getsubfont. The minimum number of a covered range is mapped
                    to the first defined character of the corresponding
                    subfont. Each field must be followed by some white space.
                    Each numeric field may be C-format decimal, octal, or
                    hexadecimal.

                    Here is the start of the font file the author uses for a
                    monospace font:

                    17      14
                    0x0000  0x00FF  lucm.latin1.9
                    0x0100  0x017E  lucm.latineur.9
                    0x0180  0x01F0  matty.latinext.9
                    0x0250  0x02E9  lucm.ipa.9
                    0x0300  0x0308  matty.gendiacritics.9
                    0x0370  0x0372  matty.greekpunc.9
                    0x0386  0x03F5  lucm.greek.9
                    0x0400  0x0475  misc.cyrillic.9

                    Entering non-ASCII characters

                    Refer to the Plan 9 keyboard(6) manual page, which is
                    mostly how it works in wily.

                    References

                    UTF8-encoded Unicode,
                    -----------------------------------------------------------
                    gary@cs.su.oz.au
